README.md, before:

## Summary

Get a sqlite file with a history of package uploads in Debian.

This program downloads email archives from https://lists.debian.org/debian-devel-changes/, storing them in a
cache file for performance. It parses the email sent to debian-devel-changes that accompanies every upload to Debian.
It takes care to keep the cache fresh and not re-download URLs unnecessarily.

In the future, it would be possible to adjust the code to avoid reading data from the web, e.g., reading email archives
(mbox files) directly. I personally think reading data from the web is fine; it allows the program to operate
with no special privileges.

The short-term purpose is to allow immediate social science analysis of Debian uploads.

The long-term purpose is to use this code to generate the `upload_history` series of tables in UDD (the Ultimate
Debian Database). I propose that in the UDD context, we would run this code and allow it to generate a sqlite file,
then copy the sqlite file's contents into the UDD postgres instance.

## Status

It works splendidly for emails from 2008 onward.

<!-- commenting out note about speed, since I need to re-run with Python 3.7: On my laptop, it takes 2.214 seconds to
run when the cache is fresh, i.e., if no uploads have occurred since it was previously run. -->

## How to use

### Run `main.py` to create `upload_history.sqlite`

Run with no arguments to extract all available data from all historic email archives. We use `python3.7` below since
that is the most recent version on Buster (current Debian release), but you can use any Python >= 3.5.

```
python3.7 -m venv venv
./venv/bin/pip install aiohttp python-debian
./venv/bin/python3 main.py
```

Output is stored in `upload_history.sqlite`.

The program will exit with status 0 if it either successfully processes all messages it finds, or logs errors peacefully
while failing to process a message.

The program creates and uses a cache file at `$HOME/.cache/debian-devel-changes-history-extractor.sqlite`. HTML pages
and other temporary data are stored here. If errors are encountered processing any messages, their message IDs and full
text are stored in `~/.cache/ddc-errors.txt`. This cache file may take up to about 4.5GB of disk space in normal
operation.

You may specify one year and month with `-y` and `-m` respectively. This is primarily intended for development. If you
lack enough disk space to cache all messages for all years, try running with `-y 2020` (for example).

### Query `upload_history.sqlite`

`upload_history.sqlite` will contain an `upload_history` table with the following columns:

- id: int: autoincrementing numeric ID; used for foreign keys
- source: string: Package name (i.e., Debian source package name)
- version: string: Package version in string format
- date: int: Epoch timestamp of the date within the upload metadata
- changed_by_name: string: Name of person who performed this upload to Debian
- changed_by_email: string: Email address of person who performed this upload to Debian
- maintainer_name: string: Name of person/team who maintains this package (as printed in upload metadata)
- maintainer_email: string: Email address of person/team who maintains this package (as printed in upload metadata)
- message_id: string: Message ID from which this data was imported. This is assumed to be unique.

If you have `sqlite3` installed locally, you can query the file. To load the file, run this command.

```
$ sqlite3 upload_history.sqlite
SQLite version 3.28.0 2019-04-15 14:49:49
Enter ".help" for usage hints.
sqlite>
```

At the `sqlite>` prompt, you can run further queries. Here are some examples.

Get the most recent 10 uploads to Debian.

```
sqlite> select source, version, changed_by_email from upload_history ORDER BY date DESC LIMIT 10;
coderay|1.1.3-2|dai@debian.org
libmail-box-perl|3.009-1|gregoa@debian.org
libobject-pad-perl|0.32-1|gregoa@debian.org
libtest2-suite-perl|0.000135-1|gregoa@debian.org
libnet-amazon-s3-perl|0.91-1|gregoa@debian.org
wbar|2.3.4-10|apo@debian.org
libosl|0.8.0-3|dirson@debian.org
dossizola|1.0-12|dirson@debian.org
speech-dispatcher|0.10.1-2|sthibault@debian.org
mate-desktop|1.24.1-1|sunweaver@debian.org
```

Get the most recent upload by one specific maintainer.

```
sqlite> select source, version, changed_by_email from upload_history WHERE changed_by_email="gregoa@debian.org" ORDER BY date DESC LIMIT 1;
libmail-box-perl|3.009-1|gregoa@debian.org
```

Commit message:

Explain what is special about 2008

README.md, after:

## Summary

Get a sqlite file with a history of package uploads in Debian.

This program downloads email archives from https://lists.debian.org/debian-devel-changes/, storing them in a
cache file for performance. It parses the email sent to debian-devel-changes that accompanies every upload to Debian.
It takes care to keep the cache fresh and not re-download URLs unnecessarily.

In the future, it would be possible to adjust the code to avoid reading data from the web, e.g., reading email archives
(mbox files) directly. I personally think reading data from the web is fine; it allows the program to operate
with no special privileges.

The short-term purpose is to allow immediate social science analysis of Debian uploads.

The long-term purpose is to use this code to generate the `upload_history` series of tables in UDD (the Ultimate
Debian Database). I propose that in the UDD context, we would run this code and allow it to generate a sqlite file,
then copy the sqlite file's contents into the UDD postgres instance.

## Status

It works splendidly for emails from 2008 onward. (Some emails from pre-2008 trigger parse failures. For information
about this and other issues, see GitHub issues.)

<!-- commenting out note about speed, since I need to re-run with Python 3.7: On my laptop, it takes 2.214 seconds to
run when the cache is fresh, i.e., if no uploads have occurred since it was previously run. -->

## How to use

### Run `main.py` to create `upload_history.sqlite`

Run with no arguments to extract all available data from all historic email archives. We use `python3.7` below since
that is the most recent version on Buster (current Debian release), but you can use any Python >= 3.5.

```
python3.7 -m venv venv
./venv/bin/pip install aiohttp python-debian
./venv/bin/python3 main.py
```

Output is stored in `upload_history.sqlite`.

The program will exit with status 0 if it either successfully processes all messages it finds, or logs errors peacefully
while failing to process a message.

The program creates and uses a cache file at `$HOME/.cache/debian-devel-changes-history-extractor.sqlite`. HTML pages
and other temporary data are stored here. If errors are encountered processing any messages, their message IDs and full
text are stored in `~/.cache/ddc-errors.txt`. This cache file may take up to about 4.5GB of disk space in normal
operation.

You may specify one year and month with `-y` and `-m` respectively. This is primarily intended for development. If you
lack enough disk space to cache all messages for all years, try running with `-y 2020` (for example).

### Query `upload_history.sqlite`

`upload_history.sqlite` will contain an `upload_history` table with the following columns:

- id: int: autoincrementing numeric ID; used for foreign keys
- source: string: Package name (i.e., Debian source package name)
- version: string: Package version in string format
- date: int: Epoch timestamp of the date within the upload metadata
- changed_by_name: string: Name of person who performed this upload to Debian
- changed_by_email: string: Email address of person who performed this upload to Debian
- maintainer_name: string: Name of person/team who maintains this package (as printed in upload metadata)
- maintainer_email: string: Email address of person/team who maintains this package (as printed in upload metadata)
- message_id: string: Message ID from which this data was imported. This is assumed to be unique.

If you have `sqlite3` installed locally, you can query the file. To load the file, run this command.

```
$ sqlite3 upload_history.sqlite
SQLite version 3.28.0 2019-04-15 14:49:49
Enter ".help" for usage hints.
sqlite>
```

At the `sqlite>` prompt, you can run further queries. Here are some examples.

Get the most recent 10 uploads to Debian.

```
sqlite> select source, version, changed_by_email from upload_history ORDER BY date DESC LIMIT 10;
coderay|1.1.3-2|dai@debian.org
libmail-box-perl|3.009-1|gregoa@debian.org
libobject-pad-perl|0.32-1|gregoa@debian.org
libtest2-suite-perl|0.000135-1|gregoa@debian.org
libnet-amazon-s3-perl|0.91-1|gregoa@debian.org
wbar|2.3.4-10|apo@debian.org
libosl|0.8.0-3|dirson@debian.org
dossizola|1.0-12|dirson@debian.org
speech-dispatcher|0.10.1-2|sthibault@debian.org
mate-desktop|1.24.1-1|sunweaver@debian.org
```

Get the most recent upload by one specific maintainer.

```
sqlite> select source, version, changed_by_email from upload_history WHERE changed_by_email="gregoa@debian.org" ORDER BY date DESC LIMIT 1;
libmail-box-perl|3.009-1|gregoa@debian.org
```
